XIV. SCHOLARSHIPS, PRIZES AND AWARDS
§30
1. Students may apply for financial assistance from funds allocated for this purpose in the state budget.
The detailed rules for granting financial assistance are defined in the benefit rules for students at
Gdańsk University of Technology.
2. Scholarships other than those defined in the rules referred to in paragraph 1 (scholarships from
private scholarship funds or those awarded by private individuals, legal entities or local government
units), together with financial prizes and other rewards, shall be granted pursuant to the rector’s
regulation, dean’s decision or other detailed regulation, although the means for their realization may
not come from the internship fund.
§31
1. The dean may apply to the rector to issue a diploma with distinction to students who meet all of the
following criteria:
1) obtained a weighted average grade not lower than 4.5 through the entire period of studies or
demonstrated outstanding scientific achievements related to the field of study, which they
documented no later than the date of the diploma examination,
2) obtained a ‘very good’ (5.0) grade for the diploma thesis (if provided for in the study program),
3) obtained a ‘very good’ (5.0) grade for the diploma examination
4) have not been penalized by a disciplinary committee or a student disciplinary panel,
5) submitted their diploma thesis within the time specified in §21(11), including the extension
granted previously, if provided for in the study program.
2. Graduates who are awarded a diploma with distinction receive the Golden Badge of a Graduate of
Gdańsk University of Technology.
XV. CONDITIONS AND MODE OF STUDY FOR EXCEPTIONALLY GIFTED
STUDENTS
§32
1. Exceptionally talented secondary school students, hereinafter referred to as secondary school
students, may attend, at their own request, university classes in the fields of study consistent with their
aptitude.
2. Applications to attend university classes should be submitted no later than seven days before the
commencement of classes.
3. The decision to grant permission to secondary school students who wish to participate in university
classes is made by the dean of the relevant faculty after receiving the consent of the student’s parents
or legal guardians, as well as the consent of the principal of the student’s school.
4. The application referred to in paragraph 1 above may also be submitted by institutions taking care of
exceptionally talented young people, in accordance with the procedure set out in paragraph 3.
§33
1. Secondary school students are required to comply with the rules and regulations of Gdańsk University
of Technology.
2. Secondary school students have the right to use the university teaching facilities and receive
assistance from the university teaching staff.
3. Secondary school students may participate in student team projects and in student scientific activities.
4. The dean of the faculty may appoint personal tutors (mentors) to take care of the secondary school
students.
§34
1. Each secondary school student shall receive a student’s transcript of records.
2. Students complete classes according to the rules set out in these rules and their results are recorded
in the transcript of records. After completing classes, each secondary school student receives
a certificate confirming attendance in classes and subjects they have completed.
3. Persons who attended classes and completed them with a positive result at Gdańsk University of
Technology and apply to study at this university in the same field, may be exempted from having to
complete the same subjects, provided the learning outcomes of these subjects have not been
changed. The final decision in this matter is made by the academic teacher conducting classes in the
particular subject.
4. Students admitted to a different field of studies at Gdańsk University of Technology may be exempted
from having to attend subjects they have already completed before commencing their studies,
provided that these subjects are listed in the study plan, and that the academic teacher in charge of
the subject decides the already attained learning outcomes to be sufficient.
XVI. FINAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
§ 35
1. These rules are applicable from the academic year 2024/2025.
2. Any issues regulated by these rules are subject to the rules of the Act together with the legislation of
the minister responsible for higher education, and the provisions of the Statute of Gdańsk University of
Technology.
3. Contracts with students concluded before the academic year 2019/2020 remain valid. The provisions
of Art. 160a of the Act of 27 July 2005, the Law on Higher Education (consolidated text, Journal of
Laws of 2017, item 2183, as amended) are applicable for those contracts.
4. The Rector of Gdańsk University of Technology shall act as the appeal body with reference to all the
issues included in these rules.
