The following rules define the organization and course of full-time and part-time studies at Gdańsk University of
Technology, as well as relevant student rights and responsibilities. The rules apply to students and staff at
Gdańsk University of Technology.
The legal basis for these rules are: the Act of 20 July 2018 – Law on Higher Education and Science
(consolidated text, Journal of Laws of 2023, item 742, as amended), hereinafter referred to as the Act, and the
Statute of Gdańsk University of Technology.
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§1
The terms used in these rules shall be understood as follows:
credit point deficit – the total number of ECTS credits for failed subjects in all semesters;
learning outcomes - the amount of knowledge, competence and social skills acquired as a result of the
educational process;
individual student account in “Moja PG” system – an account in the University electronic system ‘Moja
PG’, containing, in particular, information on the student’s course of studies and current status;
individual organization of studies – a curriculum allowing for individual selection of subjects and the
timetable, adapted to the student’s particular scientific interests or current situation;
individual research studies - individual studies for the most talented master’s degree students involving
the implementation of scientific research as part of research projects;
individual inter-disciplinary studies - individual research studies, the program of which includes at least
two fields and allows for obtaining a diploma in more than one field of study;
subject card – description of a subject, including, in particular: subject assumptions and objectives,
learning outcomes, ECTS credits, prerequisites, forms of classes, methods and means of
verifying learning outcomes, curriculum, list of essential and supplementary literature, rules of
obtaining credits, as well as the name of the academic teacher responsible for the subject;
course – a programme in a field of study, pursued by students commencing studies in a particular
academic year;
module – a subject or a group of subjects;
academic teacher responsible for the subject – an academic teacher, who is responsible for proper
realization of the subject by all academic teachers conducting classes as part of the subject, and
awards final grades to students attending the classes;
academic teacher conducting classes – an academic teacher conducting a given type of class (lecture,
practical classes, laboratory work, etc.) as part of the subject;
thesis supervisor – (diploma thesis promoter) academic teacher or a person from outside Gdańsk
University of Technology responsible for supporting the student in the course of work related to
the preparation of the thesis;
study plan – a schedule for subjects included in a curriculum;
confirmation of learning outcomes – a procedure allowing admission to studies and simultaneous
obtaining up to 50% of ECTS credits based on the knowledge, skills and social competence
obtained outside the education or study system;
repeating classes in a failed subject – attending a class again and retaking a credit or examination in a
previously failed subject;
diploma thesis – unless the exact type is specified, this term applies to all types of diploma theses:
Bachelor’s (licencjat) diploma thesis, Engineering diploma thesis (or project), Master’s (magister)
diploma thesis;
study program - learning outcomes and a description of the learning process leading to learning
outcomes with ECTS credits assigned to individual modules of the process;
subject – a unit of learning including classes or groups of classes, to which specific learning outcomes
and a number of ECTS credits have been ascribed;
restoration of student rights - formerly known as the resumption of studies - concerns the possibility of
returning to study for students previously deleted from the student register;
ECTS credits - points defined in the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System as a measure of
the average workload of the student, which is necessary to obtain particular learning outcomes;
registration for the semester – the dean’s decision which allows a student to attend classes included in
the curriculum of a given semester;
year of study – two consecutive semesters of study: odd and even; in the bachelor’s degree studies
which last seven semesters, the last year of study covers semester 7, while in the master’s
degree studies which last 3 semesters, the first year of studies covers semesters 1 and 2, and
the second year of studies ends after the 3rd semester;
II. UNDERTAKING STUDIES
§2
1. Studies at Gdańsk University of Technology can be undertaken as a result of the following
procedures:
1) recruitment,
2) transfer from another national or foreign university,
3) confirmation of learning outcomes.
2. International students may undertake and pursue studies under the provisions of Art. 323 of the Act.
3. The conditions, procedure and manner of conducting the recruitment procedure for higher education are
determined by the Senate of Gdańsk University of Technology.
4. A student may transfer from another university (hereinafter referred to as a home university) to
Gdańsk University of Technology upon the consent of a person authorized by the rector, in
accordance with the following rules:
1) A student can change the university after the end of the semester.
2) A student who is applying for a change of university submits a transfer application not later than
one month before the beginning of the subsequent semester.
3) Following the transfer approval, a student is obliged to:
a) take an oath, pursuant to the Statute of Gdańsk University of Technology,
b) sign the contract referred to in §9(1)(4) of these rules,
c) undergo training courses referred to in §3(6).
4) Refusal to transfer the student from another university is an administrative decision.
5) The detailed rules for the transfer and recognition of learning outcomes when changing the field
of study, faculty and university are provided for in university procedure No. 11.
5. Confirmation of learning outcomes is conducted pursuant to the following rules:
1) Proceedings for admission by transfer from another university are conducted by a committee
appointed by a person authorized by the rector.
2) Learning outcomes are confirmed in the scope corresponding to the learning outcomes specified
in the curriculum.
3) As a result of confirming the learning outcomes, no more than 50% of ECTS credits assigned to
the classes included in the study program may be credited.
4) The order of admission is determined by the result of learning outcome confirmation.
5) The dean may appoint a tutor for the student accepted for studies as a result of confirming the
learning outcomes.
6) Detailed rules regarding confirmation of learning outcomes at Gdańsk University of Technology
are set out in separate regulations.
§3
1. Each person admitted to studies receives an album number, a university student account, as well as
an individual account in the “MojaPG” electronic system.
2. Admitted students acquire student rights upon taking the oath defined in the Statute of Gdańsk
University of Technology.
3. Formal confirmation of taking the oath takes place on the student's individual account in the Moja PG
system.
4. The student has the right to obtain a student ID card.
5. The rights and obligations of the student expire on the day of graduation or deletion from the student
register; the person who has completed bachelor’s degree studies preserves the student rights until
October 31 of the year in which they graduated, excluding the right to financial assistance. 
6. During the first semester of studies at Gdańsk University of Technology, students undergo mandatory
training, including: health and safety, library training, study rules, the use of the ‘Moja PG’ system and
preparation for participation in classes conducted using distance learning methods and techniques.
7. The rector is the superior of all university students, while the dean is the superior of all students at a
given faculty.
8. A student starting their studies has the right to receive training in the rights and obligations of a
student. The training is conducted by the Student Government of Gdańsk University of Technology in
cooperation with the Students’ Parliament of the Republic of Poland.