VI. INDIVIDUAL STUDY PLAN AND CURRICULUM
§17
1. Students may take an individual study plan or curriculum based on the rules defined by the dean.
2. The dean may agree to individual study plans particularly for students who:
1) obtained a high grade point average after the first semester (or subsequent ones) in the case of
bachelor’s degree studies or obtained a high grade point average in bachelor’s degree studies in
the case of master’s degree studies, subject to paragraph 3;
2) have documented scientific achievements or are involved in research and development work of
R&D teams operating at the university;
3) pursue part of their studies at another university;
4) want to pursue individual research studies, including individual -interdisciplinary studies.
3. For students who are winners of the "Gdańsk University of Technology Talent Scholarship"
competition, the dean may consent to studies with an individual study program from the first semester
of studies.
4. Detailed conditions of studying according to an individual program of study at individual faculties are
determined by the faculty rules approved by the faculty councils after obtaining a written opinion of the
faculty bodies of the Student Government.
5. Detailed conditions for studying according to the individual research study plans are determined by
the rector after obtaining a written opinion from the Student Government.
6. The selection of subjects in an individual study plan has to be consistent with the learning outcomes
established for a given field and for individual interdepartmental studies consistent with the learning
outcomes in at least two areas.
7. The dean may appoint tutors for students pursuing individual curricula.
8. At the request of a pregnant student, or student who is a parent, the dean agrees for them to complete
full-time studies according to an individual study plan.
9. At the student's request submitted within 14 days of the beginning of the semester the dean may
agree to individual study plans particularly for students who:
1) pursue a part of their studies at another university, 
2) pursue second-cycle studies in an extended mode
3) pursue more than one field of study,
4) have changed their field of study or faculty,
5) have a specific level and type of disability,
6) are repeating a semester and can take subjects from subsequent semesters,
7) have returned from a gap year, resumed their studies or have been transferred from another
university,
8) are unable to attend classes in accordance with the study plan due to health conditions
confirmed by medical certificates,
9) practice a sport in which they have achievements at the national or higher level,
10) are active in a student organization at the university or at a higher level.
10. Students pursuing individual study plans or curriculums are obliged to follow Study Rules, including the
deadlines specific to their study plans.
11. The program and plan of individual research studies, including individual interdisciplinary studies, are
determined by the student and their academic supervisor, pursuant to paragraph 4, and approved by
the dean.
12. Students of master’s degree studies can apply for an extension of their studies by one semester, in
order to complete a long-term industrial research internship. 30 ECTS credits are awarded for
industrial research internships. The terms and conditions for industrial research internships are set out
in a separate regulation adopted by the rector. Permission to realize an internship is issued by the
dean.
VII. REGISTRATION RULES
§18
1. Registration for the first semester is effected by an entry in the student register.
2. Student registration for subsequent semesters is based on the student’s academic progress
measured by the number of awarded ECTS credits and on the condition of passing the obligatory
training courses referred to in §3(6).
3. The condition for registration for subsequent semesters is the credit point deficit not exceeding 12
ECTS credits counted to the semester for which the registration is conducted.
4. The condition for registration for subsequent semesters of second-cycle studies with an extended
study mode is to achieve a minimum of 30% of ECTS points in a given semester, as provided for in
the study plan.
5. The condition for registration for the last semester of the bachelor’s degree studies is the completion
of all subjects in even semesters for studies lasting an odd number of semesters, or the completion of
all subjects in odd semesters, for studies lasting an even number of semesters.
6. In the case of credit points deficit exceeding 18 ECTS points, the student is removed from the student
register.
7. A credit point deficit in a given semester should be made up for within one academic year. If a student
does not fulfill this condition, the dean decides whether they should be re-registered for the
uncompleted semester, take a break before repeating the semester, or be removed from the student
register. The decision depends on the amount of the credit point deficit, the number of failed subjects
or the number of times the subjects were repeated.
8. Information regarding the deadlines for completing failed subjects is posted on students’ individual
‘MojaPG’ accounts in the ‘MojaPG’ portal, and also appears on the university portal.
9. Students attending classes in failed subjects pay tuition fees in accordance with the agreement
referred to in §9(1)(4), as well as the rector’s regulation on rules for charging tuition fees at Gdańsk
University of Technology.
VIII. INTERNSHIPS
§19
1. Work placements, hereinafter referred to as internships, are an integral part of the curriculum and are
subject to credit award.
2. Internships are included in full-time and part-time studies to an extent approved by Gdańsk University
of Technology Senate and set out in the study plans and curricula.
3. The aim of internships is to verify chosen learning outcomes in the scope of knowledge, skills and
social competence, acquired during the course of studies or in the research conducted for the diploma
thesis.
4. ECTS credits are awarded for internships, in accordance with the curriculum.
5. Coordination of matters concerning internships is performed by faculty internship representatives
appointed by the dean (hereinafter referred to as the representatives).
6. Detailed rules concerning internships and their completion, and students' responsibilities during
internships are set out in separate rules/regulations.
7. At the student's request, the representative may count the activities performed by the student
particularly as part of employment, internship or volunteering as professional practice, if they enabled
the achievement of learning outcomes specified in the program of study