X. REMOVAL FROM THE STUDENT REGISTER
§26
1. A person authorized by the rector removes the student from the student register in the following
circumstances:
1) failure to commence studies,
2) resignation from studies,
3) failure to submit a diploma thesis or take a diploma examination on time,
4) disciplinary expulsion from the University.
2. A person authorized by the rector may remove the student from the student register in the following
circumstances:
1) lack of participation in obligatory classes,
2) apparent lack of progress in studies,
3) failure to complete a semester or a year within the specified time,
4) failure to pay tuition fees.
3. The procedure for removing a student from the student register begins with notifying the student of
starting the proceedings for their possible removal from the student register, via their personal account
in “Moja PG” system, and setting a deadline for the student to clarify the situation.
4. In the absence of grounds for withdrawal from the intention to remove the student from the student
register, the person authorized by the rector makes the decision to remove the student from the
register and delivers it to the student, pursuant to the applicable regulations.
5. The student may appeal from the decisions referred to in paragraph 4, to the rector. The rector's
decision is final.
6. Failure to commence studies is stated if the vow is not taken within 14 days of the commencement of
the academic year in which the person is admitted to study.
7. Removal from the student register due to absence from compulsory classes occurs in the event of
unjustified absence from 4 classes as part of the same form of classes in the selected subject covered
by the study plan.
8. Removal from the student register due to resignation takes place in the following circumstances:
1) if the student submits a declaration of resignation from studies in the Moja PG system,
2) in the case of failing to submit a registration application, as provided for in §28(9).
9. Students who have been registered and fail to complete the same semester three times may be
excluded from the student register on account of lack of progress in their studies.
10. A person excluded from the student register is obliged to discharge all obligations with the University,
in particular, to pay overdue fees.
XI. REINSTATEMENT OF STUDENT RIGHTS
§27
1. The decision to allow a student to resume studies is made by the dean.
2. The right to apply for reinstatement of student rights, pursuant to the conditions referred to in
paragraph 2-9, applies to students who have already studied at Gdańsk University of Technology and
have accumulated at least 45 ECTS credits at a given faculty.
3. Persons applying to have their student rights reinstated three years after their removal from the
student register are obliged to take a reactivation examination pursuant to the rules established by the
dean.
4. Resumption of studies by persons who did not meet the requirements set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 is
performed in accordance with the same principles which apply to all candidates for bachelor’s degree
or master’s degree studies.
5. Persons applying for r reinstatement of student rights are required to submit an application at the
dean’s office at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the semester in which the studies are to
be resumed.
6. Reinstatement of student rights takes place in a semester designated by the dean, after the person
applying to resume the studies fulfills the conditions set by the dean.
7. Persons resuming their studies are obliged to make up for differences in the curriculum within a scope
and time limit set by the dean. In the case of reinstatement of student rights of a person excluded for
failure to submit a master's thesis, which takes place within one year from the date of expulsion, no
program differences are established.
8. Persons who resume studies in the semester for which they were registered at the time of their
removal from the student register, or in the prior semester, are required to pay fees for repeated
classes or subjects in accordance with the rector’s regulation for the given academic year.
9. Persons who were removed from the student register on courses that are no longer conducted at
Gdańsk University of Technology may obtain the dean's consent to resume studies in a related field.
10. A person who resumed studies twice and was then removed from the student register in the same
field of study and cycle of studies may not apply for reinstatement.
11. Reinstatement of student rights is not possible after 5 years from being removed from the student
register.
XII. STUDENT LEAVES
§28
1. Students who meet the registration frequirements for a subsequent semester may be allowed to take
one semester or one year off, except for paragraphs 2 and 3. A student can also obtain a leave with
the possibility of joining the verification of the obtained learning outcomes specified in the study
program.
2. The first leave may be granted to students who fulfill registration requirements for the second
semester. The provision does not apply to: sick leave, a pregnant student and a student who is
a parent; in the above cases the student may apply for a leave also during the first semester.
3. During the semester, a student may only be granted a sick leave, leave for a pregnant student or
a leave for a student who is a parent.
4. Leaves are granted by the dean at the request made by the student in the “Moja PG” system.
5. During the leave, students retain their student rights. The right to receive financial assistance is
defined by the benefit rules for the students at Gdańsk University of Technology.
6. The dean may grant the student the leave referred to in §10(3)(2) applied for within one year from the
birth, on the basis of a medical certificate or birth certificate of the child.
7. The dean may grant a student a sick leave due to a long-term sickness, on the basis of a medical
certificate.
8. In justified cases, the rector may grant a student a leave for a period longer than one year (long-term
leave).
9. After the end of the dean's leave, the student is obliged to submit an application for registration in the
“Moja PG” system no later than 14 days before the beginning of the semester they are going to
attend. Failure to submit the application within the above deadline is considered as resignation from
studies and results in initiation of proceedings for removal from the student register.
10. A student returning after a sick leave should enclose in the Moja PG system a valid medical certificate
confirming that their health condition allows them to study, together with the application for
registration.
11. The student who returns from a leave may be requested by the dean to compensate for differences in
curriculum resulting from changes that occurred in the study program during the leave.
XIII. RULES FOR CHANGING THE FIELD OR FORM OF STUDY, OR
UNIVERSITY
§29
1. Students may change their field of study after completing a semester.
2. Students who apply to change their field of study must submit a request at least 30 days before the
commencement of the following semester.
3. Students who have been registered for at least the second semester may change their field of study at
the same faculty with the dean’s consent or apply for a change of the field of study conducted by
another faculty with the consent of the deans of both faculties.
4. A student who wants to transfer courses completed at another faculty or field of study at Gdańsk
Tech, receives a number of ECTS credits assigned to the learning outcomes from relevant courses
and internships in the receiving department and faculty.
5. The detailed rules for the transfer and recognition of learning outcomes when changing the field of
study, faculty and university are provided for in university procedure No. 11.
6. A student may transfer from Gdańsk University of Technology to another university in the country with
the consent of the relevant university authorities accepting the student, expressed in a decision if the
student fulfilled all obligations arising from the regulations in force at Gdańsk University of
Technology.
7. Following the transfer of all student documents requested by the receiving university, the students are
removed from the student register of Gdańsk University of Technology.
