V. SUBJECT COMPLETION AND CREDIT POINT SYSTEM RULES
§13
1. Participation in lectures and classes set out in the study plan is compulsory.
2. Academic teachers in charge of modules are obliged to register student attendance in classes,
laboratory and project work, seminars, workshops, foreign language and physical education classes.
Lecturers may also control students’ attendance during lectures.
3. A student whose behavior threatens the life or health of other participants of the course or who makes
it difficult to conduct classes or participate in them may be removed from these classes. In such a
case, the student's absence is considered unjustified.
4. During the semester students have the right to be excused from a class by presenting to the academic
teacher in charge of the class a medical certificate or other documents confirming a valid reason for
their absence (short-term absence from classes). The absence justification should be submitted
immediately after the reason of absence arises, but not later than within 7 days after they have
recommenced the classes. In case of doubt or insufficient documentation, the dean decides about
justifying the absence.
5. For each subject an online course in the “eNauczanie” platform should be created, where all materials
and information are uploaded: detailed rules of passing the subjects, class materials and information
updates, especially the results provided for in paragraph 7. This course should be related to the
subject and made available to students no later than the first day of classes in a given subject.
Teachers responsible for individual subjects are responsible for linking the subject with the online
course in the ‘Moja PG’ system.
6. Credit deadlines (class tests, subject tests) conducted during a semester, shall be provided to the
students not later than 7 days in advance.
7. The results of class tests, subject tests, laboratory reports, projects and other forms of learning
outcomes verification should be communicated to students through the “eNauczanie” platform within
14 days of their submission for assessment.
8. In order to be admitted to take an exam or credit in a given subject, a student has to meet the
conditions described in the detailed rules of passing the subject. Information about admission should
be provided to students no later than 3 days before the planned exam or credit for a given subject.
9. Unjustified absence from the exam results in missing one examination date.
10. A student has the right to apply to the dean for an extension of the examination session in the case of
excused absence from the exam or credit in a given subject, in particular, caused by the following:
1) illness - immediately after the cause of absence has ceased, enclosing a relevant medical
certificate,
2) another exam carried out in accordance with the study plan at Gdańsk University of Technology
or by representing the university as part of various events, including scientific or sport events -
before the examination session begins.
11. The results of examinations and credits are uploaded on individual student accounts in the “Moja PG”
system.
12. Students have the right to review the results of their graded work understood as: all physical and
electronic forms of learning outcomes verification, in particular: class tests, subject tests,
presentations, projects, mid-term papers and exams within 14 days of the announcement of their
results.
13. A student has the right to apply to the dean for permission to recognize learning outcomes based on
documented activity in scientific clubs, research projects or projects implemented for companies.
Detailed conditions are regulated by the faculty rules.
§14
1. The examination session timetable is announced by the dean in consultation with the year
presidents/starostas at least seven days prior to the commencement of the examination session.
2. Apart from the basic term of the examination or subject completion, the student is entitled to one
retake exam taken by the end of the repeat session.
3. Teachers responsible for the subject have the right to announce an additional exam term, called zero
exam term, which takes place before the primary exam. Rules of conducting and admission for the
exam are determined by the teacher. The results of exams shall be provided not later than two days
before the primary exam.
4. The results of the primary exam or course completion test must be announced within 14 days, but no
later than 5 days before the retake exam.
5. The dean may decide to conduct an examination (course completion test) before an examination
committee, in particular when the following conditions occur:
1) during the original exam (course completion test), there were irregularities in its conduct or in the
principles of its marking process,
2) the scope of the examination (course completion test) carried out exceeds the scope specified in
the subject card,
3) the academic teacher did not comply with the deadlines specified in §13(6), (7) and (8) and in
§14(4).
6. The request to conduct an examination (credit) before a committee may be submitted by a student, a
representative of the Student Government indicated in the Gdańsk Tech Student Government
regulations or by the examiner within 14 days of the announcement of the original exam (course
completion test) results, presenting a detailed justification of the charges.
7. The examination (course completion) committee consists of:
1) the dean as chairperson,
2) the examiner who conducted the examination (course completion) in question,
3) a specialist appointed by the dean in the subject matter of the exam or a related subject,
4) a specialist indicated by the student in the subject matter of the examination or a related subject.
8. At the request of the student, the examination (course completion) committee, referred to in paragraph
5, can be joined by a representative of the Student Government.
9. A committee examination (subject completion) may be written or oral, depending on the decision
made by the chairperson of the examination committee.
10. The exam result (course completion result) is determined by the dean and the experts indicated by the
dean and the student. The exam score (course completion result) is entered in the report by the
chairperson of the committee.
§15
1. Teachers responsible for individual subjects enter student grades into subject completion reports in
the ‘Moja PG’ system. In justified cases, such grade entries may be made by the head of a
department, the dean or the head of a teaching unit which is not part of the faculty.
2. Teachers responsible for individual subjects are obliged to submit the completed protocols at the
dean’s office within the deadline specified by the dean. If a grade is changed after the report has been
submitted, the teacher in charge of the subject is obliged to submit the grade change at the dean’s
office within three days of the change. Grades cannot be changed after 14 days from the
commencement of a subsequent semester without a dean’s consent.
3. Teachers responsible for individual subjects are obliged to keep marked semester papers, projects,
reports, examination papers and class tests until the end of the subsequent semester.
§ 16
1. All forms of study comprising a separate subject in the study plan for a given semester are subject to
a collective grade. Apart from the grade for a particular subject, ECTS credits are awarded as a
measure of the effort required to master the subject. The sum of awarded ECTS credits must be an
integer. The following grading scale is applied to subject completion:
Grade
in words numerically
very good 5,0
good plus 4,5
good 4,0
satisfactory plus 3,5
satisfactory 3,0
unsatisfactory 2,0
2. If a subject is completed abroad, the decision about the grade is made by the dean on the basis of
available documentation.
3. The unsatisfactory grade - 2,0 is a negative grade and denotes failure in subject completion.
4. Students receive ECTS credits for a completed subject regardless of the level of the positive grade.
A completed subject may not be completed for the second time during the same course. In the case of
changing a course, the dean shall decide whether the student is required to complete a subject.
5. The nominal number of ECTS credits assigned to a particular semester results from the curriculum.
The number of ECTS credits obtained after completing all the subjects may be higher than the
nominal number of ECTS credits assigned to a given semester in the curriculum. The surplus number
of ECTS credits exceeding the number required in the curriculum is registered in a supplement to the
diploma.
6. In second-cycle studies, at the student's request and in accordance with the established individual
study plan, the dean may extend the duration of studies (extended study mode), yet no longer than by 
2 semesters in 3-semester studies and by 3 semesters in 4-semester studies from the planned date
graduation.
7. Relevant committees assign the number of ECTS credits to individual subjects, taking into account the
rector’s regulation on the rules of adopting study plans and curriculums at Gdańsk University of
Technology.
8. ECTS credits are not assigned to the diploma exam.
9. The following formula is used to calculate the weighted average of grades (for a given semester or
several semesters and for the entire duration of studies:
weighted average grade = (sum of (o_i * p_i)) / (sum of p_i)
where: o i - is the grade for a given subject,
 p i - is the number of ECTS credits assigned to a given subject.
10. When determining the weighted average of grades, courses that were not assigned ECTS credits or
were passed without a grade are omitted.
11. The weighted average of the grades for the semester is calculated taking into account the grades in
all subjects. Missing grades in subjects result in no weighted average for a given semester