IX. DIPLOMA AWARDING PROCESS
§20
The condition for completing studies and obtaining the diploma of completion of studies is: obtaining
the learning outcomes and the number of ECTS points specified in the curriculum, passing the
diploma examination and positive evaluation of the diploma thesis in the case of master’s degree and
uniform master's studies, and in the case of bachelor’s degree studies if this is required by the study
program.
§ 21
1. Master’s diploma theses are written by students under the guidance of supervisors. A supervisor may
be a person with at least the title of a doctor. With the authorization of the faculty board, an
engineering (inżynier) or bachelor’s (licencjant) diploma may be supervised by a person with the title
of a master of engineering (magister inżynier) or a master of science (magister).
2. The dean, in consultation with the faculty board, may allow for diploma theses to be written under the
supervision of specialists from outside Gdańsk University of Technology.
3. At the student's request, approved by the diploma thesis supervisor, the dean may consent to
submitting the diploma thesis in the form of an article published or accepted for publication in a peerreviewed journal or post-conference materials (in accordance with the current ministerial list for a
minimum of 100 points), related to learning outcomes achieved in a given field, level and profile of
studies. Additionally, the students is required to submit a self-report. In the case of multi-authored
publications, the diploma student should be the first author.
4. Only the persons who fulfill the requirements for a diploma thesis supervisor as defined in paragraph 1
and 2 may become reviewers of diploma theses (depending on the level of study). The reviewer of the
work referred to in paragraph 3 cannot be a co-author of the article.
5. Collective diploma theses have to be issued jointly. Contributions of individual students to such theses
need to be clearly distinguished. The supervisor and reviewer are obliged to write separate opinions
and reviews for each individual author of a collective diploma thesis.
6. Details of the procedure for awarding diplomas are provided for in faculty guidelines, confirmed by the
faculty board and consultation with the Student Government at the faculty.
7. Subjects of diploma theses for bachelor’s degree studies and master’s degree studies are announced
in “Moja PG” at least ten months before the end of the diploma semester.
8. The diploma thesis is checked before being credited in terms of the original nature of the work,
including the use of the Unified Anti-plagiarism System. The principles of verification and acceptance
of diploma theses at Gdańsk University of Technology are specified in the university procedure nr 3.
9. A diploma thesis is considered to be successfully submitted when the following conditions are fulfilled
jointly:
1) the student submits a declaration of independent completion of the diploma thesis
2) the diploma thesis is uploaded with attachments to the university repository of written diploma
theses using the “MojaPG”, university system,
3) the thesis supervisor approves the thesis and sends it for review.
10. The date of effective submission of the diploma thesis is the date of approval of the thesis by the
diploma thesis supervisor and sending it for review.
11. The student shall submit the diploma thesis approved by the thesis supervisor in electronic form not
later than:
1) by the first day of the basic examination session in the diploma semester – for bachelor’s degree
studies,
2) by 30 April – for master’s degree studies ending in the winter semester,
3) by 30 September – for master’s degree studies ending in the summer semester.
12. A student who has been registered for a diploma semester of second-cycle studies but does not
submit a diploma thesis on time shall be removed from the student register, within the deadline
provided for in these rules. Upon a written application of the student, who has passed all subjects
except the diploma thesis, after consulting the thesis supervisor, the dean may extend the deadline for
submitting the diploma thesis in exceptional cases.
13. Submission of a master’s diploma thesis by a student who has been removed from the student’s
register and has subsequently been reinstated as a student shall be treated as a repetition of the
course ‘Master’s diploma thesis’ in the diploma semester.
14. The supervisor and the reviewer prepare reviews in the “Moja PG” system within 14 days from the
moment of submitting the paper for review.
15. Depending on the adopted faculty diploma rules, pursuant to paragraph 6, the final grade of the
master diploma thesis, engineering diploma project, engineering diploma thesis or bachelor diploma
thesis is the average of the positive grades given by:
1) the supervisor and the reviewer,
2) issued by the commission,
rounded up pursuant to §16(1), based on the table below:
c – arithmetic
mean
3,00 ≤c<3,25 3,25≤c<3,75 3,75≤c<4,25 4,25≤c<4,75 4,75≤c
in written form satisfactory satisfactory
plus
good good plus very good
16. If the assessment is negative, the dean will appoint an additional reviewer or a commission (grading
commission) to assess the thesis in question. The negative reassessment is final.
§22
1. The diploma examination at master’s degree studies may be open at the student's request submitted
to the dean, not later than on the day of submission of the diploma thesis, or in accordance with the
conditions specified in the faculty diploma rules.
2. Information regarding an open diploma examination shall be posted on the faculty internet site not
later than seven days before the diploma examination is due to take place, and shall include the
names of the examination committee members, the time and place where the examination is to be
held, the full name of the student taking the examination and the subject of the diploma thesis.
3. An open diploma examination comprises an open and closed part. During the open part the student
presents the diploma thesis and answers questions concerning this thesis. During the closed part the
student answers questions regarding their studies, in front of the members of the examination
committee only.
§ 23
1. In order to be admitted to the diploma examination it is a prerequisite to complete all the semesters in
accordance with the curriculum, including obligatory training courses and internships, obtaining ECTS
credits as provided for in the study program of a given course, as well as in the case of master’s
degree studies obtaining a positive evaluation of the diploma thesis.
2. The dean or a person authorized by the dean decides on the date and time of the diploma
examination and appoints the examination committee members.
3. Students are informed of the date and time of the diploma examination through their individual “Moja
PG” account, at least seven days before the examination is due to take place.
4. The chairperson of the diploma examination committee should be the dean or an academic teacher
who holds the title of a professor, or a university professor.
5. The chairperson of the examination committee in the case of the bachelor’s degree studies may also
be an academic teacher holding the title of docent.
6. The diploma examination takes place within two months from the date of fulfillment of the conditions
referred to in paragraph 1.
§24
1. The diploma examination is an oral examination which is assessed in accordance with the scale 
defined in §16(1), and then rounded to binding grades.
2. The diploma examination includes at least three questions concerning the subjects studied, with the
details of the examination established in compliance with the faculty rules, confirmed by the faculty
board after consultation with Gdańsk Tech Student Government at the faculty.
3. Negative evaluation of any of the answers to the examination questions requires repetition of the
diploma examination.
4. The diploma examination may only be repeated once.
§ 25
1. University graduates receive diplomas that confirm completion of higher education and certify
obtaining a particular professional title.
2. The final results of bachelor’s degree studies are calculated with accuracy
to the nearest two decimal places after the decimal point, in accordance with the following formula:
w = 0,8a + 0,2c
where:
a – is the final weighted grade average in accordance with the rules stipulated in §16,
c – is a positive grade for the diploma examination.
3. The final results of master’s degree studies are calculated with accuracy to the nearest two decimal
places after the decimal point, in accordance with the following formula:
w = 0,6a + 0,3b + 0,1c
where:
a – is the final weighted grade average in accordance with the rules stipulated in §16,
b – is a positive grade for the diploma thesis,
c – is a positive grade for the diploma examination.
The final result of studies (paragraph 2 and 3) is entered in the diploma in accordance with the
following credit scale:
Credit scale Final grade for studies
w ≥ 4,50 very good
4,10 ≤ w < 4,50 good plus
3,70 ≤ w < 4,10 good
3,30 ≤ w < 3,70 satisfactory plus
3,00≤ w < 3,30 satisfactory
4. In justified cases, the diploma examination committee may raise the final grade calculated in
accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3 by half a grade.
5. Under the conditions defined in §31 a graduation diploma with distinction can be issued.
6. Before receiving their diplomas, graduates should discharge all their obligations to Gdańsk University
of Technology.
7. Diploma candidates who fail to appear at the diploma examination for justified reasons or receive an
unsatisfactory grade may take the same diploma examination within two months of the initial
examination date.
8. A diploma candidate who received an unsatisfactory grade on the second diploma exam, is removed
from the student register, pursuant to §26(1)(3).