I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§1
The terms used in these rules shall be understood as follows:
credit point deficit – the total number of ECTS credits for failed subjects in all semesters;
learning outcomes - the amount of knowledge, competence and social skills acquired as a result of the
educational process;
individual student account in “Moja PG” system – an account in the University electronic system ‘Moja
PG’, containing, in particular, information on the student’s course of studies and current status;
individual organization of studies – a curriculum allowing for individual selection of subjects and the
timetable, adapted to the student’s particular scientific interests or current situation;
individual research studies - individual studies for the most talented master’s degree students involving
the implementation of scientific research as part of research projects;
individual inter-disciplinary studies - individual research studies, the program of which includes at least
two fields and allows for obtaining a diploma in more than one field of study;
subject card – description of a subject, including, in particular: subject assumptions and objectives,
learning outcomes, ECTS credits, prerequisites, forms of classes, methods and means of
verifying learning outcomes, curriculum, list of essential and supplementary literature, rules of
obtaining credits, as well as the name of the academic teacher responsible for the subject;
course – a programme in a field of study, pursued by students commencing studies in a particular
academic year;
module – a subject or a group of subjects;
academic teacher responsible for the subject – an academic teacher, who is responsible for proper
realization of the subject by all academic teachers conducting classes as part of the subject, and
awards final grades to students attending the classes;
academic teacher conducting classes – an academic teacher conducting a given type of class (lecture,
practical classes, laboratory work, etc.) as part of the subject;
thesis supervisor – (diploma thesis promoter) academic teacher or a person from outside Gdańsk
University of Technology responsible for supporting the student in the course of work related to
the preparation of the thesis;
study plan – a schedule for subjects included in a curriculum;
confirmation of learning outcomes – a procedure allowing admission to studies and simultaneous
obtaining up to 50% of ECTS credits based on the knowledge, skills and social competence
obtained outside the education or study system;
repeating classes in a failed subject – attending a class again and retaking a credit or examination in a
previously failed subject;
diploma thesis – unless the exact type is specified, this term applies to all types of diploma theses:
Bachelor’s (licencjat) diploma thesis, Engineering diploma thesis (or project), Master’s (magister)
diploma thesis;
study program - learning outcomes and a description of the learning process leading to learning
outcomes with ECTS credits assigned to individual modules of the process;
subject – a unit of learning including classes or groups of classes, to which specific learning outcomes
and a number of ECTS credits have been ascribed;
page 4
restoration of student rights - formerly known as the resumption of studies - concerns the possibility of
returning to study for students previously deleted from the student register;
ECTS credits - points defined in the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System as a measure of
the average workload of the student, which is necessary to obtain particular learning outcomes;
registration for the semester – the dean’s decision which allows a student to attend classes included in
the curriculum of a given semester;
year of study – two consecutive semesters of study: odd and even; in the bachelor’s degree studies
which last seven semesters, the last year of study covers semester 7, while in the master’s
degree studies which last 3 semesters, the first year of studies covers semesters 1 and 2, and
the second year of studies ends after the 3rd semester;
II. UNDERTAKING STUDIES
§2
1. Studies at Gdańsk University of Technology can be undertaken as a result of the following
procedures:
1) recruitment,
2) transfer from another national or foreign university,
3) confirmation of learning outcomes.
2. International students may undertake and pursue studies under the provisions of Art. 323 of the Act.
3. The conditions, procedure and manner of conducting the recruitment procedure for higher education are
determined by the Senate of Gdańsk University of Technology.
4. A student may transfer from another university (hereinafter referred to as a home university) to
Gdańsk University of Technology upon the consent of a person authorized by the rector, in
accordance with the following rules:
1) A student can change the university after the end of the semester.
2) A student who is applying for a change of university submits a transfer application not later than
one month before the beginning of the subsequent semester.
3) Following the transfer approval, a student is obliged to:
a) take an oath, pursuant to the Statute of Gdańsk University of Technology,
b) sign the contract referred to in §9(1)(4) of these rules,
c) undergo training courses referred to in §3(6).
4) Refusal to transfer the student from another university is an administrative decision.
5) The detailed rules for the transfer and recognition of learning outcomes when changing the field
of study, faculty and university are provided for in university procedure No. 11.
5. Confirmation of learning outcomes is conducted pursuant to the following rules:
1) Proceedings for admission by transfer from another university are conducted by a committee
appointed by a person authorized by the rector.
2) Learning outcomes are confirmed in the scope corresponding to the learning outcomes specified
in the curriculum.
3) As a result of confirming the learning outcomes, no more than 50% of ECTS credits assigned to
the classes included in the study program may be credited.
4) The order of admission is determined by the result of learning outcome confirmation.
5) The dean may appoint a tutor for the student accepted for studies as a result of confirming the
learning outcomes.
6) Detailed rules regarding confirmation of learning outcomes at Gdańsk University of Technology
are set out in separate regulations.
§3
1. Each person admitted to studies receives an album number, a university student account, as well as
an individual account in the “MojaPG” electronic system.
2. Admitted students acquire student rights upon taking the oath defined in the Statute of Gdańsk
University of Technology.
3. Formal confirmation of taking the oath takes place on the student's individual account in the Moja PG
system.
4. The student has the right to obtain a student ID card.
5. The rights and obligations of the student expire on the day of graduation or deletion from the student
register; the person who has completed bachelor’s degree studies preserves the student rights until
October 31 of the year in which they graduated, excluding the right to financial assistance.
page 5
6. During the first semester of studies at Gdańsk University of Technology, students undergo mandatory
training, including: health and safety, library training, study rules, the use of the ‘Moja PG’ system and
preparation for participation in classes conducted using distance learning methods and techniques.
7. The rector is the superior of all university students, while the dean is the superior of all students at a
given faculty.
8. A student starting their studies has the right to receive training in the rights and obligations of a
student. The training is conducted by the Student Government of Gdańsk University of Technology in
cooperation with the Students’ Parliament of the Republic of Poland.
III. ORGANIZATION OF STUDIES
§4
1. Studies are conducted in a specific field, level and profile based on the study program.
2. Studies may be conducted in full-time or part-time mode.
3. Teaching may be carried out in the form of lectures, classes, laboratory classes, workshops and
projects, seminars and foreign language courses.
4. Classes may also be conducted using distance education methods and techniques. Detailed rules for
conducting the classes are provided for in procedure No. 10.
5. Students of Gdańsk University of Technology may complete part of their study program at other
universities, including foreign universities, and students from other universities may complete part of
their study at Gdańsk University of Technology, pursuant to bilateral contracts between universities.
§5
1. The academic year starts on 1 October and ends on 30 September. It comprises two semesters
(winter and summer), and includes a series of classes which end with basic examination and retake
sessions, followed by internships and holidays.
2. The organization of the academic year is determined by the rector after consultation with the Student
Government of Gdańsk Tech, and announced on the website of Gdańsk University of Technology not
later than one month before its commencement.
3. The schedule for part-time studies is determined by the dean of a given faculty and announced on the
faculty website, no later than one month before the first meeting.
4. Classes in full-time, bachelor’s degree studies in the winter diploma semester last ten weeks.
5. The basic examination session for full-time studies lasts at least ten consecutive days, whereas the
retake examination session lasts at least six consecutive days. The consecutive days are counted
excluding Sundays and public holidays.
6. In justified cases, the rector or the dean are entitled to suspend classes for a few days or hours.
§6
1. Study programs are made available in the Public Information Bulletin (Polish acronym: BIP) within 14
days of their adoption. Changes to the study programs introduced during the education course are
made available through BIP at least one month before the commencement of the semester they
concern.
2. Subject cards are completed in the ‘Moja PG’ portal by academic teachers responsible for the subject
and published in the ECTS catalog by the ECTS catalog coordinator in the case of:
1) subjects included in the curriculum and the plan of studies - at the latest within 14 days of the
adoption of a given study program;
2) optional subjects entered into modules for a given semester - no later than within 14 days before
the students register in the “Moja PG” portal.
3. The subject cards can be updated during the learning cycle, subject to paragraph 2.
4. A detailed schedule of classes with the names of academic teachers is announced on the ‘Moja PG’
website or the Faculty website at least 7 days before the beginning of each semester.
5. Information on the hours of consultation is provided by the academic teacher who conducts the
classes, not later than 14 days after starting the classes.
page 6
§7
1. The organizational unit of students is a student group. The representative of the student group is the
president/starosta of the group, and the representative of the year is the starosta of the year.
Starostas are elected on the principles set out in the regulations of the Gdańsk Tech Student
Government. The rights and responsibilities of starostas are specified in the regulations of the Gdańsk
Tech Student Government.
2. The Faculty Representative of the Gdańsk Tech Student Government is the Faculty Student Council.
FSC serves as the main representative body of students at a given faculty and works to support their
interests and initiate activities aimed at improving studying conditions.
3. The tasks of the Faculty Student Council include in particular:
1) representing students before faculty bodies,
2) providing opinions on decisions regarding student affairs specified in the Regulations of the
Student Government of Gdańsk University of Technology,
3) supporting initiatives aimed at improving the quality of education and the conditions of student life
at a given faculty.
§8
1. In the case of studies conducted in a foreign language, the exams, credits, diploma thesis and
diploma examination should be conducted in this foreign language.
2. Study programs for a given field, form and level of education may provide for conducting selected
subjects in a foreign language. Exams or credits for these subjects should be conducted in this foreign
language.
3. Selected classes from the study program planned in Polish may be conducted in a foreign language.
This applies if the classes offered are conducted or co-conducted with academic teachers and
specialists from abroad or if international students are attending the classes. In such a case, the
language of credits is determined in consultation with the Group Representative.
4. In the master’s degree studies, it is possible to change the language of classes in a chosen subject to
a foreign language, with permission of the dean.
5. For studies conducted in Polish, the dean may agree for a student to write their diploma theses in a
foreign language.
IV. STUDENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
§9
1. Students are obliged to:
1) behave in accordance with the student’s oath and the regulations binding at Gdańsk University
of Technology,
2) attend classes in accordance with the Study Rules,
3) take examinations, complete internships and fulfil other requirements stipulated in the study plan
and curriculum,
4) pay tuition fees for educational services in accordance with the regulations in force at the
University and the agreement concluded between Gdańsk University of Technology and the
student,
5) immediately notify the University authorities of any changes in their surname, first name, address
or other personal details, which may affect the entitlement to financial assistance,
6) familiarize themselves with regulations and information posted on the website and in the
“eNauczanie” portal of Gdańsk University of Technology, and with information sent to the
student's university mail account and individual student account in the ‘Moja PG’ electronic
system, within seven days of their receipt.
7) in all matters related to the studies, use a student university mail account for electronic
correspondence. For individual issues and proceedings, the Code of Administrative Procedure is
in force.
2. A copy of the agreement referred to in paragraph 1(4) above, as provided for in the rector’s regulation,
shall be posted on the website of Gdańsk University of Technology.
§10
1. Students have the right to:
1) have their dignity respected by every member of the academic community,
2) acquire knowledge and skills and develop their own scientific interests,
page 7
3) transfer and recognition of ECTS credits referred to in §16,
4) study according to the individual organization of studies, referred to in §17, 5) justify absences from classes, leaves of absence from classes and leaves from classes with the
possibility of verification of the learning outcomes obtained, as specified in the study program
referred to in §13(4) and (9) and in §28,
6) change the field of study referred to in §29,
7) transfer to full-time or part-time studies, referred to in §29,
8) take an exam before an examination board and an observer indicated by them, as referred to in
§14(5)-(10),
9) repeat classes due to unsatisfactory learning results,
10) use the university library resources,
11) participate, through their representatives, in decision-making activities of the collegial bodies at
Gdańsk University of Technology, pursuant to the provisions of the Act and the University
Statute,
12) submit to the faculty authorities their postulates concerning curricula and study plans,
13) assess the learning process in accordance with rules defined in the Act and in the Statute of
Gdańsk University of Technology,
14) refer to the dean in the matters relating to their studies,
15) benefit, during their studies, from student financial assistance, in accordance with the rules
defined in the Act and in the rules issued on the basis thereof,
16) participate in student organizations and scientific circles,
17) participate in research, development and implementation of projects at Gdańsk University of
Technology,
18) receive the prizes and awards referred to in §30 and §31 hereof,
19) receive information about changes made in the study program during the education cycle to the
individual student's account in the “Moja PG” system within 14 days of their introduction,
20) obtain information concerning them through their individual student accounts in the ‘Moja PG’
system, with at least 7 days’ notice,
21) submit applications on electronic forms available in the Moja PG system and in the manner
provided for by applicable law.
2. Within 30 days from the beginning of the semester or within 14 days from the occurrence of special
conditions, a student with a disability has right to the following:
1) apply to the dean for an individual mode of obtaining course credits and taking examinations,
2) apply to the dean to appoint a tutor at the faculty, whose task will be to identify and present to
the dean the special needs of the student concerning organization and implementation of the
teaching process, including adaptation of the study conditions to the type of disability.
3. A pregnant student and a student who is a parent have the right to the following:
1) to continue full-time studies according to individual organization of studies until their completion,
2) to take leaves, referred to in §10(1)(5).
§11
1. With the consent of the dean, full-time students may attend classes within another field of study. If the
field of study concerns a different faculty, the consent of the dean of this faculty is also required.
2. With the consent of the dean, students may study abroad within the European or global education
framework. During such studies students retain their full student rights at Gdańsk University of
Technology.
3. Students delegated to study at another university, who completed the curriculum accepted by the
dean and obtained the number of ECTS credits required, can be registered for a subsequent
semester.
§12
In accordance with the Act, students shall be liable to disciplinary proceedings for violating the rules of
Gdańsk University of Technology or for acts offensive to student dignity.